# DSAN-5300 Project: Energy Behavior and Patterns of Prosumers
## Group Members
- Hannah Kim
- Irene Tait
- Kendall Gilbert
- Powell Sheagren


## Introduction
The basic premise behind the energy grid has historically been a relatively simple one: when we flick a switch to turn on a light in our homes, power that was produced in one location, usually a power plant, flows through the grid to us, reaching our home or business and turning on our lamp. There is an energy producer location that pushes, and an energy consumption that pulls. The role of grid operators at an energy company is to monitor this push and pull relationship, with the goal of maintaining energy balance in consumption needs and production abilities minute-to-minute, day-to-day, year-to-year. These companies and individuals must also be able to adapt in face of economic and technological changes. 


Over the last several decades, “green energy” produced by harnessing renewable sources (solar, geothermal, hydro, and wind, to name a few) has become a more and more common production source. Diversifying energy production methods have not only become more economically viable, but also more ecologically necessary in the face of accelerating climate change. Even when driving in the countryside just outside DC, solar panel farms are no longer an uncommon sight, and the technology has progressed enough to allow solar panel installation on the roofs or carpark shades of many homes and businesses. Tax incentives by more ecologically inclined governments have encouraged this. In January of this year, it was announced[1] that Estonia for the first time produced more energy from renewable sources than from traditional fossil fuels; biomass was largest producer of renewable energy, but solar panels came second with just under 700,000 megawatt-hours produced across the country during 2023. Some of that came from farms, and some came from solar panels installed on roofs.


As solar panel installation by private entities becomes more and more common, grid operators must grapple with the emergence of a new group of energy users: “prosumers”, households or businesses with solar panel installations that, as a result, both produce and consume electricity. These prosumers can, at any given time, be pulling from the larger grid or pushing their excess solar energy into it to be distributed to other consumers, a binary choice that depends upon the difference between the energy being produced by the prosumer’s solar panels and the energy they are consuming at that moment. While this has the capacity to create real economic savings by generating their own power and, sometimes, by selling their unused clean solar power back to the grid, this behavior breaks the previously simple push-pull model most energy grid operators rely on to predict how much power they should generate each day. Energy companies are often unable to flexibly respond to hourly fluctuations in what were previously unstable sectors. This can lead to partial or rolling blackouts if their energy predictions fall short, or uncaptured and wasted energy if they produce more than is being consumed.


This project seeks to use statistical and machine learning tools to identify if there is a trend in the difference between Estonian prosumer power consumption and production based on current weather patterns, the price of both renewable and non-renewable energy, time of day, and the location of the prosumer itself. If a grid operator had this knowledge in hand, they could supplement older models with ours, using demographic data and weather forecasts to predict consumption and production patterns well in advance, in order to lessen the need to respond immediately to hour-by-hour changes. Because businesses also use energy differently than households, we also attempted to classify if a given prosumer was a business or households based on their installed solar capacity, location, and net energy consumption vs production pattern. Cities have historically shied away from mixed-use zones, but as population density increases and cities become more populous, we are seeing more and more businesses drawing from grids that also serve residential buildings. The ability to assess whether a prosumer is a household or a business would give grid operators increased granularity of their models, resulting in more accurate understandings of where and when power will be pushed from or pulled to.
